---
layout: post
title: Walking
---

I like to walk.  Walking, at my own pace, sometimes for hours.
Walking, under the trees, alongside a river, on the beach, or in the
mountains.  Walking, alone with my thoughts, or chatting with my
friends.  Walking, among the crowd, to feel like a part of the world;
or walking in the countryside, to get away from it all.

I don’t walk for the exercise; though it’s not an unhealthy leisure.
I don’t walk as a means of transportation, to _get somewhere_; there
are far more efficient ways to transit.  I could run and I could
cycle, that would get me farther, further away, faster.  But I just
want to take my time, to take the time to _not be anywhere_.  When I
walk, I’m out there.  No duties, no tasks, no deadlines, no pressure.
No information, no social conventions, no morale, no legitimacy,
nothing.  No me.

Walking, you appreciate the beauty of nature, the richness and
complexity of a tree’s trunk, of a flower’s corolla, of a ladybug’s
elytra.  Walking, I can hear, see, smell the world without feeling
overwhelmed.  Walking gives me perspective.

I wish research was more like walking.  I feel like a lot of the
organization around research is goal-oriented.  You must have a goal
before deciding which path to take.  A goal that is enticing enough to
get you grants.  Once the goal is set, you must take the most
rewarding route to get there: the one that holds the greater number of
publishable results.

Both pressures for grants and for publications greatly limit the
number of acceptable research trails.  You have to take the most
efficient, most trodden path with sure benefits -- and you certainly
can’t take your time to contemplate the landscape.  You have to go
fast, have to be the first.  You must get in the car and take the
highway.

But it’s not the goal that empowers you, it’s the journey.  Results
may get you respect, recognition, fame; but only the journey will
bring you enlightenment, joy and, ultimately, freedom.  Choose the
path for beauty and for truth.  Then, don’t rush it; take your time,
pay attention.

Walk.
