---
layout: post
title: An Eye For Detail
---

Looking for a distraction instead of focusing on writing my memoir, I
turn over to the couple of printed pages my desk mate had laid to rest
upon his computer.  "Can I take a look at it?"  "Sure, I'd be grateful
if you would proofread it."  "Gladly!"  I pull the pages to my side of
the desk, grab a green pen (he likes green, I indulge), and begin
reading.

"Done!"  I show him the two pages, riddled with green underlining,
green marks, and green writing in the margins.  He jokes "You
definitely didn't skim."  We go through the text together, discussing
the validity of each suggestion one by one.  "Are you that obsessed
with details with your own memoir?  If so, it must take you quite a
long time to write."  I am, and it does.

I didn't time it, but I think it took me at least one hour to
proofread his two pages and discuss the corrections with him.  One
hour for two pages he already wrote.  This might seem like a pretty
inefficient ratio to some, but not for me.  This very morning, it took
me two hours to write one moderately short paragraph.  I am
inefficient, and have been for a long time.

Now, it must be said that even if I take my time, the results are
often worth it.  My desk mate was pleased with the suggestions I gave
him; they made his work clearer and more precise in places.  I like to
think that this extra effort makes the difference between "good" and
"great"; that walking the extra mile is what gives a work its polish.

Some would call that nitpicking.  It is true that I sometimes take
care of details that are foreign to my brethren.  After a few years of
handing reports, I developed an amateurish interest towards
typography.  I try to find a font that is suited to the content.  I do
this in part because, even though Computer Modern is a great font,
defaults should be questioned.  Besides, variety is the space of life.
So I choose a font, then I touch up the layout of the report.  I
reduce margins, adjust font size, interline space, heading, section
numbering, etc.  I tune all these knobs until I'm satisfied with what
I see, until I feel I have something unique, coherent, and elegant.
In one word, when I create something beautiful.  So, some would call
that nitpicking.  I don't; details matter to me.

But, all of this attention over details leads to a gross inefficiency.
If my advisors could see how much time I can dedicate to a single
detail, they might well wonder how I can finish anything.  Since I am
slower, the trick is to work longer.  I put more hours into it, and
hopefully I can compete with someone who doesn't obsess over color
schemes.

I'm not an engineer.  I don't look for efficiency.  I would very much
like to be efficient, but not at the cost of sacrificing polish.  I
thrive for elegance, not __.  The problem is, elegance is subjective,
while efficiency is measurable.  So, when comparing myself to others,
I can see how they are more efficient (hey, look at this greatly
designed website I made up in just 2 hours using Disrupt and Pivot),
but I don't necessarily see all the details.  What's my point here?
When looking at my work, one won't always appreciate the effort that
went into details, especially when those details vary with one's
taste.  The worst response may well be "Hey, that's neat and pretty,
but maybe a bit light."  Because, as everyone woman knows, when you
are pretty you can't be deep.

Truth is, I ask myself too many questions.  This is not necessarily a
bad thing, until I overindulge in this habit.  Asking questions slows
creativity.  "Is this the right word to use?  Wasn't there another
which will convey my meaning more precisely?  Wait; can I say that
here?"  By asking all of these -- legitimate -- questions, I reduce my
hability to produce freely.  I should focus on getting the meaning
across, then, only in a second phase, ask these questions and get into
nitty details.

I often try to condense sentences to their Minimal Expressive Form
(MEF).  I want to pack as much meaning into as few words as possible.
That way, I don't have to repeat anything twice.  This is a fallacy I
carry over from programming.  There is no such thing as DIY in
writing.  On the contrary, stating the same idea, albeit using a
different wording, is essential to get the idea across.

Want to do that to programming languages too.  Probably where
this itch came from.

Thinking natural language will be interpreted by a machine, must
follow rigourous syntax, semantic, and meaning.
