At lunch, I shared my view on motivation.  Why do I create?  Because I
like the process of creation.  I find the process of creating is an
order of magnitude more fun than the result.

Take games.  I had a blast programming different game prototypes and
toys.  Sometimes, the result is enjoyable; especially the joy of
seeing your creation in motion.  But playing the game is a wholly
different experience than building it.

Take drawing.  What can you do with a drawing?  You can only look at
it, or put it away.  Contrast that with all the possibilities that the
actual act of drawing offers.  What will I draw?  Imagination is the
limit.  Each trait, each movement of the hand of paper is a choice --
deliberate or unconscious.  The possibilities are endless, without
even considering support or stationery.

I sometimes doodle.  I’d rather call it “doodling” that “drawing”
because it’s more filling a page with random squiggles than attempting
to realize a specific vision.  Doodling feels very good to my hand,
and to my brain.  The process is mostly unconscious: I often begin by
a round motion of the wrist, then the tip of the pen leads the dance.
Because the result is very abstract, my eyes always see patterns in
these shapes.  I see cities, birds, silhouettes, great contraptions
and wild landscapes.  It’s a lot like gazing at clouds; very soothing
for the brain.

Recently, I started doing music in much the same way.  Assembling
string of notes, finding weird-sounding instruments, elaborating a
rhythm.  The result is seldom pleasant, but the process is a joy.

Mostly, I program.  And the more I programmed, I came to realize that
I really like finding new ways to write the same functionality.  What
if used an object?  Let’s try to get rid of this ‘if’.  How would I
solve this using recursion?  Probably most of my projects went
“unfinished” because I just endlessly revamped some part here,
refactored some part there.  I find that programming is essentially
articulating a mental comprehension.  In a way, finding different
program expression is articulating equivalent mental models.  It’s
looking at all the facets of a beautiful crystal with endless
reflections.

Writing for me is articulating thoughts that I can not express with
code.  Data structures, state machines and recursion equations are
sometimes ill-suited to express about things of the mind (though I
invariably try).

In writing as in programming, /the result is important/.  A program
can be very useful, regardless of the way it is written.  The written
word is also a convenient way to record thoughts, and present them as
a coherent, articulated discourse.

/What is not important/, in my eyes, in all the endeavors above,
is feedback from others.  I’m not talking about whether criticism is
constructive or not: both are equally deeply flawed.  Feedback is
flawed on three points: 1) it is a fleeting opinion 2) from another
human being 3) about the /result/ of your work.

1) When you ask people for an opinion, they will give you one, even if
they don’t really have one.  Sometimes you just did not care one bit
for an experience; sometimes your opinion does not fit into an awkward
imposed spectrum (“Were the carrots, disgusting? delicious? okay?”).
Relatives and friends will often be nice to you, regardless of what
they truly think.

2) Other people are the result of a myriad of different experiences
from yourself.  Not two persons are alike.  Even the same person,
taken at different points in time, is not necessarily coherent.  Each
person has its own agenda.  If everyone wants your drawing to be “more
blue”, but you don’t like blue, why would you do it?

3) Is the most important point.  People can only express their opinion
on their experience of the result of your work.  You are the only one
who can appreciate the process of creating it.  Though other artists
of the medium can relate, and even if they were to impose their
personal preferences upon you, why would you listen?

Once you put the result out there to be judged, people will expect you
to change it towards their own personal preferences.  Since everyone
has different preferences, it’s obviously an impossible problem to
solve.  And don’t answer: optimize for the common denominator.
