# On Taste and Tolerance

"To each his own" they say.  That's how a discussion over individual
tastes usually ends, because arguing over taste is pointless.  In
French we have the similar saying: "Tous les goûts sont dans la
nature", literally "All the tastes are in nature".  So, if I were to
say to you "I like blue" and you answer by "I'm more of a pink person
myself", we both know this particular thread of conversation is over.

Now, there are _some people_ who won't stop the conversation there.
Some people take color preference very seriously.  With my friend
Barnabé for instance, the conversation will usually go like this
instead:

Me: "I like blue"
Him: "Well, I don't.  Actually, I despise blue, and find your liking
of this dull color very distasteful."
Me: "What ?"

And then he goes on and on about the overabundant occurences of blue
in nature, how blue is weakly perceived by human eyes and so on and so
on.  He actually _argues_ about taste, and is in fact so apt at
arguing on such matters that he can make you wonder whether you really
like blue after all.

You can see it like this:

A(blue) = like
B(blue) = despise

So obviously, A(blue) != B(blue) and that's that.

But Barnabé has a function that takes a person (himself) and gives an
output of right/wrong.  So instead it's blue(B) =

The idea is this: Barnabé, instead of a set value, a constant, has a
set of arguments of why he has this particular opinion, and can also
pass on these arguments to others, and if they agree they can share
this opinion.

Like B(blue) = \person -> opinion and then B(blue)(B) = despise

But also B(blue)(A) = despise ...

The picture is more complicated than that if we should account the
fact that people have a tendency to integrate arguments and use them
for other ends.  That's not the fault of the arguments themselves,
just a consequence of the fact that their application to different
people may have different results.  B can only hope that with his
arguments, other people will have the same conclusion.

A and B are both people.  Let's see people as functions over

Now of course you might say that the reason why there is no point in
arguing over taste is because taste is just not something that you
reason about.  If you have a justification for your taste in colors,
then it's not a taste anymore, it's _an opinion_.  And that's my
point.





More importantly, I know that

But, what we if both like blue?

"Well, I don't.  Actually, I despise blue, and find that your liking
of blue offensive."  like blue and I don't, then it's

You probably know how pointless it is to argue over individual taste.
If I come unto you saying

Let Alice and Barnabé be two people having the following imaginary
conversation:

Alice: "I like blue, I think blue is the best color"
Barnabé: "Well, I'm fairly partial to sienna myself.  Sienna is
definitively superior to blue."

If someone came unto you saying



If we use some maths, we can see that snug people encode their
preferences not as a value, but as function that you evaluate.  If
their arguments can convince you over, then their own beliefs are
validated.

So, what has this to do with tolerance ?  Well, if you think of taste
and opinions as a result of one's history, you can't really blame
someone for having different opinions as yours, whatever they may be,
even the most hateful, regretably.  But you can alter their input, by
adding to their history, or by show a flaw in their reasoning.  Giving
them more data.

That reminds me that my personal opinion function usually maps
everything to bottom.
