---
layout: post
title: On Reading
---

For the longest time, I believed that reading a book would make me smarter.  The
reasoning might have went a little like this:

1. books are written by smart folks;
2. their writing is distilled smart-stuff;
3. reading their prose is like drinking smart-full nutrients;
4. like absorbed nutrients fuel my body, absorbing words with my eyes fuels my
   brain;
5. thus, reading their words makes me smarter.  QED.

Now, you might object to assumptions #1 and #2, and, in an all my *naïveté*, I
*was* aware that these did not hold for all litterature known to mankind.  Or
rather, I suspected that books came in varying levels of quality, which in turn
meant various amount of knowledge to absorb.  To keep the culinary analogy
going, some books are like fast-food: cheap and full of saturated fat and sugars
to give you a short but potent high, while others are more like *légumes*: less
thrilling, but more nutritious.  In a healthy diet, you want less of the former,
and more of the latter.  *Mens sana in corpore sano* calls for a healthy
*reading* diet.

A [quick back-of-the-envelope calculation](https://what-if.xkcd.com/76/) shows
that the number of books one can reasonably manage to read in a lifetime has
been eclipsed by the number of books in circulation since around ... five
centuries ago.  Clearly, in my eternal quest of wisdom, I would need to devise a
system to part the wheat from the chaff.

From an early age, I caught on that *recommendations* were an effective
solution.  I have a simple formula: the likelihood of me reading a book is
proportional to the number of times that book was recommended to me (directly by
a friend, or indirectly through word of mouth), weighted by the area of overlap
between the recommender's interests and mine.  In other words, if we both are
passionate about waffles, and you tell me about this book on Belgian wafflology
after the first World War, then the likelihood of me finding a copy to read is
very high.  On the other hand, if we have diverging interests, then chances are
low that I will get out of my way to find that copy of *All About Sophie* you
keep raving about.  But I keep hearing about it, there might be something to it
after all.  Of course, other factors come into play, and I do not actually carry
out calculations to rank books that were recommended to me in order to pick one
to read.  But even loosely applied, I do get good mileage out of this formula;
and it can be extended to other media like films, videogames and music.

Also of importance is the nature of the book.  Some books have explicit
pedagological value: textbooks, scientific articles, historic treaties,
encyclopedias, user manuals and the like.  It is easy to see how one could want
to download all their factual contents directly into one's brain.  Other kinds
of books, like fiction, have a different value proposition: they primarily
entertain you with a gripping story.  One may then question the utilify of
cramming one's head with the intricacies of Bridget Jones' failings at finding
love.  Aside from the trivial observation that, yes, sometimes, it *is* good to
be entertained, even by clichés, I'd argue that even fictional writings may hold
valuable insights.  Powerful stories can often be used in daily conversations to
draw one's point home more vividly.  Greek mythology is rife with characters
whose actions gave us useful analogies and even common words: Odysseus' sirens,
Icarus' flight, Tantalus' punishment, Narcissus' fatal narcissism, Sisyphus'
sisyphean plight, *etc.*

All of that to say that while I favor reading technical books because they will
more often hold actionable knowledge, other literary pursuits may still be
worthwhile for expanding my horizons, or even just for fun.

Now, having acquired countless books to absorb knowledge from, I want to touch
on the *consequences* brought about by that forementioned belief.

- I read books from front to back, without missing a letter.  Footnotes and
  back-cover blurb included.  Carefully sieving each page, in search of nuggets
  of wisdoms.

  I was once appalled at a fellow student who revealed to me that her so-called
  speed-reading technique involved skipping *whole paragraphs*.  I couldn't bear
  the thought of glancing over a sentence in fear of missing out some important
  tidbit; skipping paragraphs was heresy.

- It bred an unhealthy fixation on *quotes*.  Assuredly, quotes contained the
  words that were the most potent, the most meaningful of the book they came
  from, otherwise they wouldn't worth quoting!  I was fascinated by the mysterious
  force of some quotes that are part of the vernacular, passed down generation
  after generation to be used as thought-terminating clichés around Christmas
  dinner.

  I got a quote dictionary: that's a book with quotes for every word.  Two
  quotes for "city", three quotes for "lion".  One quote for every occasion.
  Each quote was seemingly very profound, solemnous in its brevity—the shorter
  the quote, the stronger its impact.  My agenda even had quotes for each day;
  one was simply:

  > D'oh!
  >
  > — Homer Simpson

  Over time, I realized that quotes drawed most of their power from two sources:
  their author, and their generality.  Quoting famous figures is an effective
  way to [argue from authority][]. And, like horoscopes, quotes thrive not
  because of what they actually say, but because of what we read into them.

  Their effects started to wane when I tried to match quotes to their context.
  Often quotes lose their luster when you realize that their point is made
  better by the surrounding paragraphs of the text that harbor them.  You come
  to appreciate the intricacies and nuances of the author's argument, rather
  than cargo-cult on just one cherry-picked sentence.

  I still like a good quote, especially when their relevance to the text is [not
  obvious][cheeky-quote].

- Once, I imagined that I could expand my vocabulary tremendously by reading the
  dictionary, cover to cover.  Mind you, I must have been around ten.  Having
  somewhat more ambition than diligence, that attempt ended before reaching
  ‘abacus’.

  Still, I clinged to the prospect of absorbing knowledge from such ponderous
  volumes.

  I ardently coveted the [Junior Woodchucks' Guidebook][the-book].  This
  encyclopedic little tome seemingly contained all the answers to all the
  questions one could ever ask.  Alas, it was fictional.  Remember that there
  was no Wikipedia; and no Internet access.  But we did have encyclopedias.

  The one we had was a sort of elaborate old-school scam.  Initially, you would
  just buy a magazine containing a few interesting articles.  These articles you
  could detach, and they came with holes to conveniently put them in binder.
  But then, you had a large binder with just a handful of articles, and a child
  with a consuming curiosity, so what did you do?  You bought a subscription to
  receive more articles every week in the mail.  Each Tuesday, I would get a new
  batch of fresh knowledge; I fondly remember reading about a wide range of
  topics, from medieval conflicts to relativity, from sound waves to giraffes.
  Then, I would dutifully transfer the articles to the binder, putting each one
  in its proper category.  Initially, the costs were low, but they slowly
  accrued to amounts that probably matched the price of a twenty-volumes
  encyclopedia.  As months went by, the binder grew larger, and soon a new one
  was needed.  Of course, the publishing house also sold official binders for a
  pretty penny.  We ended the subscription after I filled my fifth binder.

  Even though it occupied a whole shelf, and thus was roughly ten times larger
  than the Woodchucks' Guidebook, it was obvious that it did *not*, in fact,
  contain [the sum knowledge of all humanity][alexandria].  Reality crushed the
  magic of the Guidebook, but the idea of a tome containing all the answers
  never really left me.

  At University I was fascinated with data structures.  They have the elegance
  of simplicity on the outside, and the beauty of intricacies on the inside.  It
  seemed they were crucial to solving many fundamental problems in computer
  science, and as I wanted to become the very best, I had to catch them all.

  I started compiling all the information I could find in a personal
  encyclopedia.  I documented their applications, their big-oh complexity,
  tradeoffs of implementation.  My goal was for it to be the one place of
  reference I would ever need for all my curriculum.

  Its sole article was, and still is, the Linked List.

  After that, I realized that exhaustivity of information was not only
  inachievable, but most of the time indesirable.

<!-- - It led me to believe there was an *objective meaning* to any book, one single -->
<!--   interpretation of fiction that could be agreed upon.  Often, the one -->
<!--   interpretation intended by the author. -->

While these events did alter my perception of knowledge, they did not altogether
dispel my belief that reading alone from a book would grant me its author's
wisdom.  Other observations, however, came to clash with this theory.

After reading a book about Artificial Intelligence, I was objectively incapable
of *writing* the same book.  If I had absorbed this knowledge, then surely I
would be able to?

And what about books which I had difficulties reading?  Was I hoping that, when
I finally got to the end, after clutching my way through the tortuous sentences
and unfamiliar jargon, I would be enlightened?

And what about re-reading books?  Surely, from the theory one would conclude
that re-reading books would be a clear waste of time.  But surprisingly, it
wasn't?  Even worse, when re-reading books, I would find some *other* insights,
other knowledge that I had previously missed, or misinterpreted.  Except it
wasn't really misinterpretation.

Now, as a grown child with facial hair, I have a another point of view.

Books can only teach you what you can get out of them.  That sounds vacuous, but
it emphasizes one key point: the reader own knowledge determines the outcome as
much as the sequence of words in the book.  There's an interplay between both.
My experience of reading *Thinking Forth*, and what I will retain from it, may
be vastly different from yours.

I realized that after reading the words off the page, the process of digesting
them mostly feels like a reorganization of thought.  The words need to be
integrated with my own mental organization.  It feels like introducing a
stranger into some long standing fellowship.  There is an established dynamic
that's clearly working, and the stranger will have to learn that dynamic in
order to fit in.  Same with this foreign-knowledge-bearing words.  Their
concepts must adapt to the way my mental models are already set up.  And this
osmosis is an irremediable alteration of the book contents.



It's a simple explanation.  Like ancient tribes that believed that eating the
brain of your enemy would give you his knowledge, or that eating his calves
would make you run faster.

Simple theories are the scaffolding we use to grow.  Once we shed them away, we
turn to other, more sophisticated and nuanced theories that overcome the
previous one's shortcomings.

Shed after shed, we catch ever-growing glimpses of the full picture, until we
abruptly die.

[argue from authority]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argument_from_authority
[cheeky-quote]: /phd-manuscript/#variations
[the-book]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Junior_Woodchucks#Junior_Woodchucks'_Guidebook
[alexandria]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guardians_of_the_Lost_Library
