---
layout: post
title: Research, luck and communities
---

Recently I was in a room, where a somewhat famous, quite successful researcher
took presentations of more famous, even more successful researchers, and showed
them to us.  The main points were:

- We do research because we like the intellectual challenges, advancing the
  field, and mentoring students.

- But these perks come at a cost, the cost of responsability.

- Whether you like it or not, you have to play the game

Well, I respectfully disagree.  If you don't like the game, first, you don't
have to play.  But more to the point, if you don't like the game, and you still
want to play, you can change the rules.  *Especially* if you are a successful,
established researcher with a good track record and a permanent position.  You
*are* in position to change the rules, and not risk your career doing it.

On the other hand, PhD students who don't like the game have basically no power
to change it.

Of course, what often happens is that, once you have played the game, and
benefited from it, then you might not see fit to change its rules, especially if
you would be losing in the process.  That's a tension inherent to the system:
people who haven't made it want to change the rules in their favor, while people
who have made it want to prolong the status quo.

This tension echoes over and over.

### Luck?

Someone than raised up a good point: that there was an important *luck factor*
to success, that is often diminished, or even outright dimissed.  WHy is that?

Well, one reason might be that, if you acknowledge that luck had a large part in
putting you in the position where you are now, then at the same time you reduce
the importance of your own actions.  That's bad for the ego, but that's also
very bad for future prospects.  Researchers are trusted with multiple-million
dollars grants.  Imagine them saying to the grant committee: "Well, I've done
many great things in the past, although some of these successes were lucky, if
you give me millions of dollars I will deliver other great things; but hey maybe
that won't work as well this time because I may have just been lucky in the
past."  I can see how that might not be as convincing.  So out of necessity, you
are tempted to leave luck out of it.

But on a personal level, where you are only accountable to yourself, you are
also tempted to dismiss chance.  Admitting that your success did not come out of
your own efforts, well that's a bit demotivational, isn't it?

But the truth is, just because luck had a part in it, it doesn't mean that it's
totally random.  In fact, when you look at researchers track records, they don't
go from trash publications, to top conferences, to trash publications again.
There's a consistency.

But if there is a consistency, the part of luck is not very relevant, is it?  If
the luck factor is not strong enough to sway the trend, then it's worth
acknowledging, right?  If you have a standard deviation of 1 when values are in
the hundreds, then the deviation has little to no impact.

What is luck, really?

When I throw a dice, the result is said to be random; i.e., determined by luck.
If on the other I take the same dice, lift it off the table a few centimaters,
and drop it such as it doesn't roll, then the result is not random.  I threw the
dice, but not enough.  You often hear it: "Yeah, the dice didn't roll enough,
throw it again."

Luck is simply all the factors that we do not explicitly consider.  Of course
it's deterministic: if you look at the angle my hand is throwing the dice, the
dice size, material composition and balance, the force of the throw, the air
friction coefficient, the bounciness of the table, etc., then you *could*
determine the result with great precision.  But you *don't want* to consider all
these factors, so you just say "luck".

What are the luck factors of research then?  Obviously, the most important luck
takes part when you are choosing your PhD topic, lucking out with a good topic
and advisor, and maybe lucking out on a position.  After that, the more work you
do and publish, then *inertia* becomes the determinent factor of success.

Good researchers have better grants, attract better PhD students, have more
opportunities for collaboration... which of course turns into better work, in a
positive feedback loop.

As such, the rich becomes richer.  Again, it's a system that we find in other
areas of society.


### Communities

I also happen to believe that *communities* have a large importance in your
success.  If you want to publish in top conferences, then it's easier if your
work is well-aligned with these conferences' research topics.

An outsider may think that any sound scientific can get accepted at a top
conference, but that is not the case.  Conferences are not neatly distributed
evently between all domains.  Conferences are built around communities who share
common interests.  Then, at some point, some of these conferences are gilded by
random agencies around the world, and now they are the one you have to publish
to in order to get a promotion, and other conferences are seen as inferior.

So, if you were part of a community, regardless of whether you were doing good
work, some people found a way to measure good work, and now you are a slave to
their yard stick.

Again, you can see the parallels with notation agencies in finance.  Yes they
come up with a bunch of rationalizations to justify their triple As, but at the
end of the day, it's still somewhat arbitrary.

And then there's hype.  Maybe you happen to be working on research *du jour*,
the hot topic that is just printing grant money and easy publications.  Today
it's machine learning, before it was object-oriented paradigm, before it was
CASE, and even before that, artificial intelligence!  How the world turns.

So, if you happen to work in that area, whether by choice or not, then you may
have more grants, more PhDs, more publications, etc.  If not, then too bad for
you.

And if you happen to very much like a certain topic that everyone has moved past
on (like, say, AI during AI winter, or... AOP after 2008) then TOUGH LUCK.  Even
if you do good work, the odds are stacked against you.  Conference reviewers are
not that objective you know.

That's probably where the luck factor is: when you are applying for a PhD, you
seldom have a good sense of what domain is "in" or "out", and you may not even
have a large array of choices (because, hey, your grades may not allow you to
get a PhD in that top university in your country, and you cannot emigrate
because your mother is sick and you need to take care of her, or a million of
reasons).  So you end up picking one.  And by the time you get a feel for what
is good research and bad research, then it might already be too late.
